Place Type Narrative Descriptions: Walkable Places
Urban
Urban Mixed Use
Urban Mixed Use districts are exemplified by a variety of intense uses and building types. Typical buildings are between 3 and 40+ stories tall, with ground-floor retail space, and offices and/or residences on the floors above. Parking is usually structured below or above ground. Workers, residents, and visitors are well served by transit, and can walk or bicycle for many of their transportation needs.
Urban Residential
The most intense residential-focused type, Urban Residential areas are typically found within or adjacent to major downtowns. They include high- and mid-rise residential towers, often surrounded by 2-3 story townhomes, with some ground-floor retail space, and parking usually structured below or above ground. Residents are well served by transit, and can walk or bicycle for many of their transportation needs.
Urban Commercial
Urban Commercial areas are typically found within major Central Business Districts. They are exemplified by mid- and high-rise office towers. Typical buildings are between 20 and 40+ stories tall, with ground-floor retail space, and offices on the floors above. Parking is usually structured below or above ground; workers tend to arrive by transit, foot or bicycle in large numbers.
City
City Mixed Use
City Mixed Use areas are transit-oriented, walkable, and contain a variety of uses and building types. Typical buildings are between 3 and 30 stories tall, with ground-floor retail space, and offices and/or residences on the floors above. Parking is usually structured below or above ground.
City Residential
A very intense residential-focused type, City Residential is dominated by mid- and high-rise residential towers, with some ground-floor retail space, and often surrounded by 2-3 story townhomes. Parking is usually structured, below or above ground. Residents are well served by transit, and can walk or bicycle for many of their transportation needs.

City Commercial
The Central Business Districts of most cities contain areas exemplary of City Commercial, with many mid- and high-rise office towers and government buildings. Typical structures are between 4 and 40 stories tall, with ground-floor retail space, and offices on the floors above. Parking is usually structured, though many workers arrive by transit, foot, or bicycle.
Town
Town Mixed Use
Town Mixed Use represents a walkable mixed-use neighborhood, such as the mixed-use core of a small city or transit oriented development, with a variety of uses and building types. Typical buildings are between 3 and 8 stories tall, with ground-floor retail space, and offices and/or residences on the floors above. Parking is usually structured, above or below ground.
Town Residential
Containing a mix of townhomes, condominiums and apartments (but generally very few, if any, single family homes), Town Residential is characterized by dense residential neighborhoods interspersed with occasional retail stores. Typical buildings are 2-5 stories tall, with limited off-street parking; residents tend to use transit, walking and bicycling for many of their transportation needs.
Town Commercial
Equivalent to the center of a traditional town, or a more employment-focused transit-oriented development, Town Commercial contains a mix of buildings set in a walkable context. Typical structures are between 2 and 8 stories tall, with ground-floor retail, and offices, services, and small amounts of residential on upper floors.
Village
Village Mixed Use
Representing the walkable mixed-use core of a traditional neighborhood, Village Mixed Use is often oriented around a transit station. Typical buildings are between 2 and 6 stories tall, with ground-floor retail space, and offices and/or residences on the floors above. Parking is structured, tucked under, or placed behind buildings so that it does not detract from the pedestrian environment.
Village Residential
Containing a mix of single-family homes on small lots and townhomes, Village Residential is characterized by traditional neighborhoods, designed to be supportive of transit service, walking and bicycling. Typical buildings are 2-3 stories tall, with small yards and an active focus on the public realm.
Village Commercial
Equivalent to the center of a small town, or a lower-intensity employment-focused transit-oriented development, Village Commercial contains a mix of buildings set in a walkable context. Typical structures are between 2 and 6 stories tall, with ground-floor retail, and offices, services, and small amounts of residential on upper floors.
Neighborhood
Neighborhood Residential
Representing a traditional neighborhood, Neighborhood Residential is characterized by single-family homes on small lots, interspersed with the occasional ground-floor retail store with a few apartments on the floors above. Typical buildings are between 2 and 3 stories tall, with small yards and an active focus on the public realm, set in a context designed to be supportive of transit service, walking and bicycling.
Neighborhood Low
Containing a mix of single-family homes on small lots interspersed with some homes on larger lots, Neighborhood Low is characterized by traditional neighborhoods, designed to be supportive of walking and bicycling. Typical buildings are 2-3 stories tall, and located within walking distance of a mixed-use neighborhood center.
Place Type Narrative Descriptions: Auto-Oriented Places
Employment Areas
Office Focus
Representing the most intense auto-oriented single-use office areas, Office Focus is characterized by office towers surrounded by parking areas. Typical buildings are between 2 and 6 stories tall. Parking can be either structured or provided on surface lots. Workers tend to arrive by auto, though densities are high enough to support suburban transit service.
Mixed Office and R&D
Representing intense suburban office/industrial/research areas, Mixed Office and R&D is characterized by a mix of employment buildings. Typical structures are 1-6 stories tall, surrounded by surface parking or the occasional parking structure.
Office/Industrial
Moderate-density suburban office and industrial areas are represented by Office/Industrial. Typical structures are 1-5 stories tall, surrounded by surface parking lots and truck loading bays.
Industrial Focus
Employment areas characterized by warehouses and industrial uses are represented by Industrial Focus. Typical structures are 1-2 stories tall, surrounded by surface parking lots and truck loading bays.
Low-Density Employment Park
Suburban low-intensity non-retail business areas are represented by the Low-Density Employment Park type; typical uses include warehousing, low-rent offices, industrial, construction yards, transportation fleet services, and freight depots. Typical structures are 1-2 stories tall, surrounded by surface parking lots and truck loading bays.
Suburban Commercial/Mixed-Use Areas
High Intensity Activity Center
Representing the most intense auto-oriented mixed-use developments, High Intensity Activity Center is generally characterized by a walkable development set in an auto-oriented context. Typical buildings are between 2 and 7 stories tall, with ground floor retail, and residential units or offices on the floors above. Parking is structured and/or provided on nearby surface lots.
Mid Intensity Activity Center
Mid Intensity Activity Center does not necessarily represent a mixed-use development type; rather, it is usually characterized by multifamily housing located immediately adjacent to a retail center, in an auto-oriented development pattern. Typical buildings are between 1 and 3 stories tall, generally surrounded by surface parking lots.
Low Intensity Retail-Centered Neighborhood
Representing the case of a block where strip commercial fronts on to an arterial, with single-family housing on the back side facing a collector street, Low Intensity Retail-Centered Neighborhood is not a mixed-use type. Set in an auto-oriented development pattern, it could be accurately described as two separate development types placed side-by-side. Typical buildings are between 1 and 2 stories tall, generally surrounded by surface parking lots.
Retail: Strip Mall / Big Box
Generally characterized by single-story retail buildings surrounded by surface parking lots, Retail: Strip Mall / Big Box represents auto-oriented retail strips and centers. While the occasional 2-3 story mall appears in this context, most buildings are single story and have a footprint that is smaller than the amount of the site devoted to parking.
Industrial/Office/Residential Mixed High
Not necessarily representing a single type of development, Industrial/Office/Residential Mixed High is rather characterized by a wide-ranging, intensely developed mix of uses located in close proximity and set in an automobile-oriented context. Building heights can range from 1 to 17 stories, and uses can include but are not limited to industrial, warehouses, offices, residential, and retail.
Industrial/Office/Residential Mixed Low
Not necessarily representing a single type of development, Industrial/Office/Residential Mixed Low is rather characterized by a wide-ranging, less-intensely developed mix of uses located in close proximity and set in an automobile-oriented context. Building heights can range from 1 to 3 stories, and uses can include but are not limited to industrial, warehouses, offices, residential, and retail.
Suburban Residential Areas
Suburban Multifamily
Predominantly containing apartments, condos, and town homes, Suburban Multifamily represents developments that may have internal walking paths but are set in an automobile-oriented context. While densities are high enough to support bus transit, residents are likely to drive for most trips. Typical buildings are 2-5 stories tall, surrounded by surface parking lots.
Suburban Mixed Residential
Suburban Mixed Residential areas contain a mix of apartments, condos, town homes, and single-family homes, with densities high enough to support bus transit. While individual developments may have internal walking paths, they are set in an automobile-oriented context, and thus residents are likely to drive for most trips. Typical buildings are 1-3 stories tall, surrounded by surface parking lots.
Residential Subdivision
Containing a mix of single-family homes on medium and large lots, Residential Subdivisions do not have densities high enough to support transit service. While individual developments may have internal walking paths, they are set in an automobile-oriented context, and thus residents are likely to drive for nearly all trips. Typical houses are 1-2 stories tall, with plentiful off-street parking.
Large Lot Residential Area
With individual single-family homes set on generously sized lots, Large Lot Residential Areas do not have densities high enough to support transit service, and tend to be located far from essential destinations. Houses are set in a decidedly automobile-oriented context, and thus residents are likely to drive for nearly all trips. Typical houses are 1-2 stories tall, with plentiful off-street parking.
Rural Residential
Homes in a Rural Residential area tend to be set on lots with average sizes of 1-2 acres, providing plentiful yard space for their owners. The rural context is decidedly automobile-oriented, and thus residents are likely to drive for nearly all trips. Typical houses are 1-2 stories tall, with plentiful off-street parking.
Rural Ranchettes
Rural Ranchettes may not be economically productive whole units, but may rather act as hobby farms for their owners, depending on a variety of factors. The rural context is decidedly automobile-oriented, and thus residents are likely to drive for nearly all trips. Typical houses are 1-2 stories tall, with plentiful off-street parking.
Rural Employment
Rural Employment areas contain a variety of land uses, including working farms, ranches, agriculturally-supportive land uses, solar installations, oil fields, and gravel pits. While the rural context is decidedly automobile-oriented, and thus residents and employees are likely to drive for nearly all trips, the low-intensity of land uses tends to keep traffic volumes low. Typical buildings are 1-2 stories tall, with plentiful off-street parking.
Campus/University
College/University areas tend to be internally walkable, though they can be located in either a walkable or auto-oriented context. Buildings can range from 1 to 20+ stories, depending on the design of the campus. Parking may be plentiful or restricted; housing may be provided on-site in large amounts, or students may commute from homes in other locations.
Institutional
Representing a variety of institutional land uses, including hospitals, prisons and other governmental facilities, Institutional areas are strongly characterized by the needs of the institution in question.
Parks & Open Space
Representing trunk open spaces or larger regional parks, Parks & Open Space areas serve a critical role in defining the greenspace of a region. These areas should be identified early on in a planning process, with their locations mapped out and protected from future development.
